so I'm going to speak about darts
satsang or satsang is the program that
I'm leading since 2015 used to be young
artists in residency program and right
now we are more complex more develop in
developing many directions and this is
what I am going to talk about so let me
give you a bit of context what is
Samsung is the European laboratory of
particle physics used to be the center
for nuclear physics but the science has
advanced in the last 60 years and right
now we are looking more deeper into
matters so this is the fundamental
structure of everything from this table
to the end of the universe and this is
what 10,000 people at CERN are
researching and they do it by building
really complex machinery one of our
iconic machines is the Large Hadron
Collider this is the machine that you
are seeing in the screen is inside that
tunnel a circular tunnel underground in
some places is a hundred meters deep in
some others is around sixty eighty but
is next to the lake of Geneva in
Switzerland it become being established
in Switzerland and right now is sharing
territory because it has expanded in
with France and you can see the Alps the
Mont Blanc somewhere there the lake of
Geneva and underneath here they are
wearing out probably three thousand
people working and I have to go to the
tunnel Juden see them to see perhaps
little groups here and there but the
place is very very large and this the
largest machine
is the this machine has been created
design it as a prototype is still being
upgraded all the time every every year
there is new things happening new
materials new magnet new fiber new
everything because is the the machine
that is running just under continuous
testing monitoring in the underground we
have well the Large Hadron Collider is
colliding particles so you create new
matter something happens they are in
fact recreate in the beginning of our
universe it's very very hot is the hot
universe the Big Bang is being created
there and this is not a metaphor analogy
is true it's the hottest place in our
universe as far as we know and also is
the coolest because they need to cool
down this huge crazy machine just to
make it work
I'm not melt away and then we have four
big detectors detector is something in a
way similar to what we have in our
mobile phones but much bigger so here
you can see the this beauty which is the
CMS detector at the Large Hadron
Collider and there are four of them four
of them all of them different
all of them with different purposes for
their research and yes this is where I
work where I work has interesting
history from many different angles so
there is the roots of the creation of
Europe the Europe we know today and
maybe not tomorrow but they so far so
good
em is really here it's the first
interstate er
European organization based on
fundamental science and probably the
first one in the world were outside
academia scientists decided to get
together and to have a hope a place
where to meet and to devise new
artifacts for finding the fundamental
laws of our universe and nature is
really really inspiring place as
inspiring that already well when I
arrived to CERN I went to the archives I
noticed that already in very early
stages so far history there was these
people James Lee Byers the performance
and fluxes artist who came in 1972 and
kept coming back 73 74 and at the time
CERN was totally unknown for many of us
well I was not even born but but it was
not the place that we know today in this
iconic place that everyone at least in
Europe want to visit but artists were
already there pioneering this
questioning of how we approach nature
and then later we have another more
famous examples jana modi came in 2005
and he compared himself to an antiproton
and he walk through an empty tunnel that
was still not occupied by the Large
Hadron Collider to try to identify why
are we thinking about fundamental blocks
of matter and how we may be one of them
but composed by thousands and well yeah
it was an interesting experiment he walk
run the the the circle the 27 kilometers
trying to find himself then we have
Anthony calmly of course he is
pioneering everything that relates to
being in
the place in the right time so he
donated feeling material one of his
series of his cultures and is there in
the main building and then we move a bit
forward and we are in today maybe in
this 2011 when the some directors
realized that there was something
happening why artists are coming how can
we do it better and better for many
reasons because there was not an
articulation in the program the rule
Walter was not a program but there were
many art is knocking the door of the lab
and sneaking in doing things we didn't
know what the host so being an artist
and so in 2011 the director or former
director Ralph Hoyer who was a very
enthusiastic guy and he really yeah yes
joining any little adventure new things
he said okay let's open a program unless
make give the the resources and provide
for this artist because they are
obviously researching something as we
are and since then we have a program
that is official that is has an
articulation and I like to put I always
repeat this is my mantra is the official
arts program of CERN and the leading
worldwide the the leading world's art
and science program fostering the
dialogue between artists and physicists
when I arrived in 2015 I I decided to
drop some assumptions like interaction
between art and science what is
interaction any longer
collaboration well there's an assumption
before you need to create the context so
collaboration comes later or might not
come or might come from the first moment
but you cannot really push too
for the people to collaborate for me is
more a dialogue I must change being to
gathering on space that is not really
natural in a space that is the most
scientific space that you can imagine a
space that is even dedicated to the most
complex science the most complex precise
technology in the world and the place
where you probably can assess touch a
bit the the most advanced knowledge
about the nature of our nature our
universe and with that we we know that
science is the lens of that we use to
understand nature so for all that those
reasons artists had a place and have
still a place at some inquiry
questioning being the present having the
resources for being there and to pursue
the big questions about our universe and
our identity as humans and our
connection with everything that is
around us other species there our planet
and beyond by being there Mayan Sun is
that humanity's right now at this edge
where we are looking beyond into the
abysmal and sung is a good place to look
or to have this perspective from so
since then we have open calls every
every year we we just close one for big
programs in fact Rosa is the next artist
in residence and this just by
coincidence that we are together in the
same panel is very very I think there
was some curatorial intuition that this
might happen so thank you very and
and this artist we come to spend time
with us for at least one month three
months maximum so far and these are some
of the places that they go they go to
the archive to the Atlas detector to the
theory corridor because there is a
condition implication on this radical
conception of our world and how our
talent to go beyond our senses and
humans is so impressive and I still I
still find it very difficult to believe
well I mean with the terrorists and they
tell me something that blows your mind
and how come how can they imagine and
put together ideas that are predictions
of something that we will definitely not
know if one day we can prove it with our
machines so the machines artists this is
the reallys detectors and well I have
seven minutes left and so I'm going to
go directly to some of the artworks that
happen after these residences or after
this dialogue sir
and I think we we have been fostering a
new way of thinking of course many of
you know really Ikeda he came with some
amazing and pretty unique competence to
the lab he is a really good self-taught
mathematician so he spent a lot of time
with our terrorists and the ferry
corridor and after that he developed the
several pieces but what you are seeing
here is micro/macro in which he reflects
about the planck universe the Planck
scale which was launched at in Cairo in
the site km in summer 2015
Ikeda well for me of all the works we
have is
the most the better samples for an
immersive experience in a synesthete
experience that is based and tell us so
much about the principles of particle
physics and cosmology the installation
consists of two overwhelming projections
which one fold on an area of over 375
square meters and the splurge human
perception on the smallest microscopic
level as well as the largest level of
the endless space beyond the observable
universe and another work that is
related directly to the nature of dis
pyramids is halo and Maria mentioned
before was the curator of the automatic
art Commission on our past last year and
this was the work that was develop
during the residency and beyond so the
semi conductor came as artists in
residency in 2015 and because they are
really amazing and they have a unique
really singular way of working and very
methodological almost scientific they
managed to put together collaborations
with scientists in for this production
in fact they work with the data capture
by Atlas raw data and Atlas is the one
of the four detectors and the largest
detector at the Large Hadron Collider
that sits in a covering of 100 meters
below ground near the main site of Sam
in Atlas beams of particles from the
Large Hadron Collider collide at the
center of the detector and this is
something you can see in the work
because what the artist wanted to
replicating very illustrative and
appealing way was the generation of
collisions debris is in the forms of new
particles so let me play you a video and
for that I need to go to the b-mail okay
okay
immersive installation which embodies
semiconductors ongoing fascination with
how we experience materiality of nature
through the lens of Science and
Technology the artists work with raw
data and collect all this data put it
together in new typography with
scientists from the Sussex University
and from the experiment from the Atlas
experiment and create created
elektroakustik vertical device is a
piano what you are seeing are the the
the artifact that was designed for this
experience is they use 360 360 streams
piano streams as long as well as 4
meters high the and the visitor could
experience the collisions and the and
the nature of particle physics research
in the space by going inside and outside
the pyramid the diameter of the artwork
is 10 meters so is it was a very
powerful and and experience to be there
okay I have two minutes left
this is challenging so I come back
what is interesting is that they a place
like CERN you have so much technology
and the technology is never obsolete is
technology can be reused all our
scientists and you cannot think of the
people from CERN doing equations the
whole day they are actually masters of
the technology they can do anything from
coding hardware and we have just trash
everywhere
sometimes they recycled the technology
it is reused but for the artists is
amazing paradise and there is some
analogies that you can find in the way
these devices are created and in fact in
the in the in the Audemars Piguet are
commissioned we brought some of these
machines into the gallery and we're
almost ready made the I think this was
the only time they left the laboratory
and became something else with in
interaction with the public so do you
have more time like 5 minutes keep going
ok again because I relied you to stick
with the idea that all the artists work
illustrating or replicating in a way the
the principles of science there are
other art other artists that go beyond
in their strategies and the way they put
together the projects so let's look at
the case of Susan Treister Susan Theresa
Theresa an artist from London for many
years in her career she was an outsider
she has a pretty peculiar practice and
she's been researching history of
Science and Technology now
or third or Tharks way so she came to
CERN with a very focused idea she wanted
to know more and also prove her idea
her vision about the holographic theory
which is for those who maybe some of you
are familiar but it's a very very
obscure and difficult to get theory that
is related to string theory and but it's
also related to black holes research and
is a really important topic at the
moment in in the third group so while
the spirit mental realm allows a
representation as you're showing in
cdiz and semiconductor works of
intrinsic relations with not a nature
through through these pyramids there are
artists like Susan that are captivated
by these theoretical models in her
approach she constructed centric
narratives and unconventional bodies of
research and also an unconventional way
to to propose ideas to the scientist in
twenty in nineteen she arrived to CERN
syrtis in residency with the question is
the orographic universe principle the
theory that our universe could be a vast
and complex alla graham something that
has been soaked by artists since the
beginning of our civilization that was
her question in her time at CERN she
invited scientists mainly working with
quantum gravity and black holes to
address this question with her by
hypothesizing that beyond acknowledge
art historical context and imperatives
artists might have also been
unconsciously attempting to describe the
holographic nature of the universe the
final artwork consists
consists of a video that comprises over
25,000 chronological images of our
history from cave painting to global
contemporary art including outsider and
psychedelic art that occurs conceptually
the actions of sun's particle
accelerator the Large Hadron Collider by
accelerating at 25 images per second in
a loop second seize seconds so this is
part of the work but she didn't stop
that and once I disclosed library of
images there is a soundtrack of
interviews with some watercolors a
collection of watercolors that have been
made by the scientist she was
interacting with illustrations and
articulations of the holographic
principle and she just closed the door
behind me she went with the scientist
and she asked them to record a
watercolor painting their ideas the
graphic universe the plateau cave the
horizont of the black hole and this is
something that is in reservations at the
moment so her work hypothesizes a
reality that has perhaps being intuited
over the ages a reality beyond the
already documented international
intentional depictions of spirituality
mystical or transcends realities and
which is the reality of their hola
graphic nature of the universe so we are
having many lately many many artists
coming with ideas that open new angles
of research today I still have time
okay okay so I won't say anything but I
plug this video by Mikah Rotenberg is
work that you you can see in the new
museum and it's right now in the new
museum we are commissioning
[Music]
you are work out of the residences and
I'll and this is one of them it's called
a spaghetti blog change so Mika is
inspired by the accumulation of
materials and the continuous flux of
energy and matter that connects the
mechanical and the corporeal she came to
CERN with the obsession accumulation of
materials cables stuff and she went into
this pediments antimatter Factory Alice
detector which is this one and and she
put these images together with other
images from the wall where something
like this happened like the obsession
for gelatine
these singers from Siberia have they
accumulate the energy and goes out some
unexpected waves into their voice again
Alice detector and yeah this is another
not illustrative way to approach art and
science at CERN so I leave it there I
think you can find this video in the
internet now I think it's uploaded in be
male and well I love to have more time
but yeah too bad huh
thank you
[Applause]
[Music]